well thank you now i will start to get
my awkward setup
um set up and
talk about the basics of data that with
screencast um there is code to follow
along at the data led handbook if you
obtain the slides or click the link in
the shared notes
then uh you can get to uh this page here
at the datalit handbook
where there are copy and paste code
snippets that you could use to paste
them
into your own terminal and there's also
a little bit of background
explanation which i'm trying to
incorporate into what i'm saying
and links to chapters in the datalit
handbook if
you want to find this from the
main page of the datalit handbook then
it's quite simple you just have to go
all the way to the end um and then
there's an introduction to datalit at
the mpi
berlin alrighty
okay so as a prerequisite if you want to
code along
then you will need to have data light
installed and configured
so if you type something like
this into your terminal then it should
return
a data led with a version string and
that should be a fairly recent one if
you've installed it from
let's say pip or other package manager
then it should say um 0 13 5 which is
the most recent release
and you should also have a configured
git identity so if you would run
this command git config list to list all
of the configurations
git knows about you then it should have
a username
and an email address that is associated
with you
if that is not the case then this is
and it's also in the datalit handbook uh
how you would add this configuration
for your local computer and that's
probably only the case for people that
haven't used git before um
okay so one thing that i mentioned
already
is that datalit is a command line tool
and it has a python api so you can use
dataled
either in its command line um
api where here for example i'm
showcasing a data.create command
but you can also use the same command
in its python api where you
would for example do an import of the
python module
um datalit api sdl and then have access
to all of the data that commands
um as methods of what you have imported
but if you don't use python which is
completely fine then you can use it also
in
most other programming languages
just via system calls so here's an
example of how you can use it in r
with the system call and then you can
type the command
line call that you would commonly use
in the command line um now
let's start i've already mentioned that
data led data sets are dataled's core
data structure and that a data set
is just any directory on your computer
that you instruct dataled to manage
and i've told you that they can be
created
from scratch or from existing ones they
can also be installed from remote
sources
and that they can also be nested and
linked but let's start by actually
looking
into how a data set can be created and
here's
an example of how i do this i'm using
the data that create command
to create a new data set on my computer
if i execute this command then dataled
will create a new directory that is
called my analysis
wherever i'm currently running this
command one thing
that i have added to this command
is a configuration option with the dash
c flag that is called yoda i will
have to only later get into the details
of what this does
but it applies a set of useful
configurations
that are adapted to the use cases of
data analysis
and it applies also some useful
pre-structuring
to the data set that i have just created
so if i take a look into um the analysis
data set
in that i change directories so cd
into it from my terminal and then take a
look at the directory structure that i
find inside of this
tree and that's a command that mac os
and windows users may not have
um so you would need to find an
alternative on how to view that
you can see that this is a directory on
my computer that is already
pre-populated
with some things that we regard as
useful to have in a data analysis namely
a code directory
and some readme files that are
pre-populated with some placeholders
to encourage you to write documentation
and written files for your
data analysis project now if i take a
little
deeper look into the data set by not
only listing the contents
that are seen to the naked eye but
listing all contents with the dash a
flag that
also shows hidden files uh i can find a
couple
of um so-called dot directories or dot
files the datalet.get.attributes
those are hidden files for a reason they
they shouldn't
be tampered with unless you know what
you're doing
but those files are an indication
uh that there are version control tools
working in the background in this
repository
and that's an indication that we can
perform version control operations here
in this dataset and i'm going to show
you
how this is done um so the first thing
that i'm going to do is
i'm going to to make a change to an
existing file in this data set
to show you how i can see those changes
and track them uh what i'm doing here
is a little bit convoluted because i use
the command line
to um delete the placeholders in the
readme file i do this
by just echoing an empty space into this
readme file and that's not the common
way that i would delete contents
but this way i can do it in terminal you
can also just take an editor
and delete all of the contents of that
file
if i now want to query the data set what
it
thinks of what about what has just
happened
then i can use a command that is very
similar to the git status command
that leonard has shown in the concept
section which is called data led stages
data led status reports on the current
state of the data set
and since i have modified a file that
was placed into version control with
dataled
and then changed this file this file
shows up as being modified
and i can take an even closer look into
the precise
nature of the change if i'm using the
git diff tool which then it has also
shown i think
to actually highlight everything that
i've replaced and everything that i have
put into the file so you can see those
red uh highlights with a minus at the
beginning of the line
and those are the ones the lines in the
readme that i have deleted
and the plus that's a line that i have
added which is just an empty space
um i will do the exact same thing
to the other readme file that is placed
in the code directory
so that i now have two changes they are
pretty much identical
they are just deletions of the
placeholders in the readme files
and if i would say that's a fantastic
change in my data set
that i really want to to to save
and have in my revision history then
there's
one um a command that i can
do in order to save these changes which
is the data let's save command
and data datalet save is a command
that takes the current state of the
dataset and will
record it as is to the dataset history
and the current state includes all files
that are
in the repository but yet untracked and
all modifications that are done to files
that are not yet tracked what i'm also
attaching
to this um save command is
a dash m option which is short for dash
dash message
which is an option that lets me define
or attach a short concise summary of
what i have done
which is the commit message that i will
attach to
those changes if i execute this
then dataled will record the changes
that have been done to those files
and save them into my dataset history
and now let me show you uh
how i'm going to so now i'm going to do
another um change in order to display an
important construct
here um i'm just opening up the readme
file in
a text editor in my terminal and i'm
just going to add some contents
um let's say my first data let's
data set and i'm going to save that and
close it and here's what has changed so
far
so that's nothing out of the ordinary
just as we have seen there's a change to
a tracked file that now shows up as a
modification
but what i'm going to show you now
because version control is so super easy
um is what happens when
i have a second change that is unrelated
so what i'm doing with this next um
command is i'm going to download with
the wget command
a internet comic from this url if i
execute this then wget
will place a new file into my data set
and if i run data let's status on the
current state of the data set then you
can see that i have an untracked file
a png and a modified file the readme.md
file
now one important thing to note is the
data let's save
saves the complete state of the data set
and in order to create a nice
and clean revision history a nice and
clean
data set history in my data set i
want to make sure that i only save those
changes
into a safe that belong together
because my main um my main motivation to
have a nicely
set up revision history is to have a
clean set of steps that i have taken
and also the possibility to revert
singular
changes i have done to my data set
without affecting unrelated changes
and here is how i would do this i have
two changes in my data set
and if i want to use data that's called
api let's let's save
then i'm simply attaching a path to the
precise file
that i want to um that i want to save
if i execute this datalet will not save
the complete state of the dataset but it
would will only save the modifications
of the file that i have specified in the
path
and the next data let's save will take
care of
saving the remaining changes in this
case it's the compiling png which i
can then associate with a fitting commit
message
as shown here so
what you uh just as a quick summary of
what i've just shown you
what you've seen here is that data set
data
data dataset is a directory with version
control capabilities
and it is a join git and gitanox
repository because we have those tools
working in the background
for us in order to provide version
control capabilities
and version control is nice because i
was able to keep things organized
and to keep track of the changes that i
have done to the readme into the data
set as a whole
and i can now revert changes or go back
to previous states and i'm going to show
you
quickly how that is done but before that
i just as a reminder or just as a
summary
with datalet version control boils down
to two things
data sets and files so once you have a
data set that you
have created with data let create or
installed
then you can just place files in there
or modify
existing files in there and then do a
data let's save in order to save those
changes
nevertheless you can still use git
commands if you're more comfortable with
using using those and get annex commands
with using
those but um data that safe is the one
that is in data that's core api
and because version control is so easy
um
a version control is very easy because
every file that you put into this data
set can then be really easily version
controlled
regardless of its size with the same
command so
procedurally even if you have never used
git
if you use a data data set then you can
use a single command or two commands
create and save and then maybe status
in order to get from no version control
to version control
and because it's so simple you can
follow um
best practices quite easily which boil
down to
saving meaningful units of change so
only those that belong together
and attaching helpful commit messages to
what you're doing
and although i've shown it here only
with very small files this means that
you can also version control your data
so let's take leonard he has recently
acquired
an fmri study and now he can take all of
his large
neural imaging data which are gigabytes
per file add them into a dataset
and then just do a datalet save of all
of his files
and they are safely version controlled
in
his data set and that is something for
those people that don't know git
that git isn't capable of doing because
it doesn't
handle files that are too large very
well
and it also doesn't handle binary files
very well and in a second
i will go a little bit deeper into the
reasons of
um of why that works and how that works
but first of all i want to showcase some
of the features that version control has
so one thing is that
you now have a history of
what has happened in your data set and
all of the files have this history
attached to them so i can now use a
command such as git lock
on a particular file to find out
everything
that has happened to this file during
its existence
and i'm going to take this moment in
order to
show people that are unfamiliar with
what we're seeing here
um because it's an unfamiliar view for
those people that haven't used git
but it's also a view that that is that
is occasionally
uh to get used to if you do it regularly
so what you can see here
is a revision history and you can
probably
see those commit messages that we have
applied here
so one of those blocks that i have just
highlighted
that's a single save and one entry in
the revision history
of the data set and an entry that is
associated with this readme file so you
can see
that such an entry consists of a bit of
information
for one there's a human readable commit
message
and i make use of that commit message
because i can now identify what has been
happening
at this change so i have an incentive to
do an informative commit message you can
also see that there's a date and an
author attached to this commit
and that's where the good configuration
of your email and
uh username actually came into play and
then you have something that is called a
sum
this is this weird 40 character string
right here
and this is a sequence of characters
that uniquely identifies
every single commit in your history and
every single
version of a file or a data set
and that is a useful thing to do because
what i can now do is i can interact with
this history so something
i am capable of doing with a get his
dream
um and people that have used kid are
familiar with this but i'm going to show
it
just for for for the record and for
people that have never done this
i can for example take a a bit of this
commit hash and give it to the get
checkout command
in order to revisit the state of the
dataset
at this commit so if i take a look at
the readme
that has existed at this state of the
dataset you can see that this
is the state of readme where i had
deleted everything
and i can then go back to the
most recent state by checking out the
branch which is by default called master
that
i was previously on at the most recent
point
and if i now take a look into the readme
then i can see oh the contents that i
have added with the most recent commit
they are back again
and although this was only a very brief
and quite basic exploration of this git
history
you can go really fancy and what this
tries to demonstrate is that if you do
this revision tracking
then whatever you have ever placed and
saved in a file that is version
controlled
is never really lost you can bring it
back to live or you can just
take a look at it if it's useful for you
later
okay now one thing that datalat adds
to what git can do is that it has the
capability
of a recording provenance and
if you have for example ever save the
pdf onto your
hard drive and then forgot where you got
it from when you wanted to actually send
a link to someone
else then you know how important it can
be to have a reference or a record of
where that file actually came from
and here's where the term digital
provenance comes into play and we see
that throughout this workshop
digital provenance is defined as the
tools and processes used to create a
digital file the responsible entity
and when and where that the process
events occurred and git already
tracks a lot of digital provenance in
the form of these commit
uh entries but datalit adds a couple
more provenance entries to them and the
first one that we'll see
is that we can record where a file comes
from
if we obtain it from let's say a web
source and here's where i'm going to
demonstrate
uh what is called the data let download
url and i'm just going to
um to to hide a little easter egg
in my data set by downloading a comic
and then
saving it into the dataset under the
name.easter egg
so that's that it's a hidden file that
is a comic that people
can maybe discover and you can see that
the data like download url
also takes a commit message where i'm
summarizing what i'm doing
then it takes a path onto where
something that should be
downloaded needs to be saved and it
takes a url on
where i need to download something from
and when i execute this command data
that will download
the comic it will save where its origin
is and it will
register or it will it will save
everything under the commit message that
i have just
given and if i now open this easter egg
with xdg
open that is a unix command or linux
command that
uses whatever tool is registered to open
a file
if you're on windows that won't work
there you would need to use start as far
as i know
but here's the comic okay and
in a couple of minutes you will see
where the providence of
the original location of where that file
came from
really becomes very very useful but
before that
i want to give you a short summary of
how local version control works with the
data that
so data let create creates an empty data
set and then there are those procedures
for example yoda
and also text to git which you will see
later um that are useful even though you
don't
don't yet know uh why but i will get to
that
um now each dataset has a history that
is
allowing it to track files and their
modifications and there are tools for
example gitlock and also tools that have
a nicer visual interface for example
ticks
tick that can explore this history if
you want to save
a data set state then you can use data
let's save
and if you apply a concise commit
message to summarize the change then you
can be very helpful to future you and
others to create a
nice and readable commit history
data download url obtains web contents
and records
their origin and then also saves the
change and data led status just like git
status
reports the current state of the data
set
and you should make sure just as a best
practice
to have a clean data set that means no
modifications and no unchecked files
because then you can be sure that you've
never lost anything or
you you don't risk losing something by
accidentally deleting for example
and with a couple of commands someone
who has never used version control with
data led can get
from this state to this state
that means a very neat and clean
and simple version control routine
however
version control is only one aspect of
data management and i'm going to
quickly go to the next unless there
are uh questions at this point uh
about uh version control with data led
so if you would go
back to your phones and uh give me a
hint on
on whether you have question then i have
a chance of
of maybe answering but and maybe you're
also answering uh
uh asking questions in the chat then yes
maybe
maybe just summarize what happened in
the chat so
um andre asked something about um
where files um like where the files go
that you save it to the
data set so if they go to the to get or
get annex and for example
how this interacts with the git ignore
file but i
already told him that you will cover
this in a bit oh
thank you so much okay and maybe i have
a question actually
[Music]
i also used um data let's save
on um just regular git repo that wasn't
a data that data set yet and that also
works right
i mean i think if i remember correctly
it worked um
i think so yes i assume so
yeah because in a way i mean it seemed
logical to me because in a way if
if the data that save subsumes both the
git add and the git commit command in in
one command essentially
then it should do the same thing even on
a git repo
that is not a data indicator
yeah i think so if if i'm mistaken in
that then
um michael or benjamin can probably
intervene in the chat
yeah they just answered it is meant to
work okay cool
so now i'm going to continue and talk
about consuming data sets so you've seen
that
creating a data set is perfectly
possible but you can also clone data
install them and then have access to
their contents
and i'm going to show you how how that
is done
um by going briefly out of this data set
that i've created
and instead cloning another data set
this is a somewhat domain agnostic data
set
which is just a collection of machine
learning books you can see
that the data that clone command is
really fast
and if i go and take a look into the
machine learning books then i can see
that there are quite a number
of of books inside of them
so while pdfs are not usually that large
it was a remarkable fast pace of
downloading
now something that is intriguing about
data like data
sets that one has to know in order to
not be confused is
that they are incredibly small so if i
take the du command disk usage
and display the disk usage of this
directory in
human readable sizes that's what the sh
flag does
then you can see that it's only a couple
of kilobytes and that's
definitely not enough to cover the size
of all of those pdfs
and here i have summarized that also
in this gif so if i have a neural
imaging data set
that is super quickly downloaded then i
have all of these files
but they are super small and the reason
for that
is that upon installation only um very
small files and what i would refer to as
metadata about file available
availability and file names are
retrieved and
um that means that this data set that
i've just cloned
are a gigantic data set with terabytes
of data
is super lean there and the reason for
that
is that um may sound funny is that
there's no file
content yet available directly after
cloning so here's another example when
i'm cloning the study forest data set
the neural imaging data set
then after cloning it's only 18
megabytes
but file contents can be retrieved on
demand and that happens with a data that
get command and i'm going to show you
um how this works in a second but before
i'm going to show you how
you can actually find out how much
content is
present in a data set so if i use the
data let's status command with the annex
flag
and i get a report on how much data is
there actually to retrieve
how much data i have i have basically
access to and you can see here
uh there is a little bit more than 60
megabytes of pdfs that i have access to
in this data set now and now if i want
to have one particular book
or a set of books then i can use
data.get to retrieve the content of this
file on demand
and you can get a complete set of files
you can use globbing as i did here to
retrieve every
file that starts with a d you can get
directories
so you can be really flexible with those
calls
but importantly you can see here that
the content of those files is now
actually downloaded and that takes a
considerable amount of time longer than
the cloning because now
only the content has been retrieved
and this
is a really important and
nice feature of dataled that i
frequently use because this allows you
to have more access to data on your
computer than you have disk space
here's an example of some of the larger
data sets that we use from day to day
in our institute in neural imaging one
is the enhanced nathan klein institute
data set
that takes up on our cluster 1.5
terabytes
but if i clone it on my computer then
its full size is only one and a half
gigabytes
and one i think that's the second
largest data set that we currently
manage
that's a collection of the human
connectom project data set
that entails 80 terabytes almost in more
than 15 million
files if i download this one in full or
if i clone it in full
then it takes up considerable amount of
space
almost 50 gigs but that's just a
fraction of the 80 terabytes
and that is useful because frequently at
least in my analysis
i don't need all of the data so i can
here just pick whatever i need
and only use that disk space
and also i don't always need to have the
data available
and actually on my computer which has a
mid-sized
hard drive 500 gigs i think i have
access to more than 200 terabytes
of data with this mechanism now
yes maybe just to quickly chime in here
um
kind of to um give this perspective from
um like um
i think it's really important to
emphasize this concept of
um these lean data sets and that actual
file content might not be available
because it was
i remember it was also very confusing
for me at first that there seems to be
files when you look at them
in your file browser but you can't
actually open the contact and this
might also feel frustrating at first
because you think
the file is actually there but it's
actually not
and um but then once you once you learn
that
um you can just flexibly get all the
content you need
it's really an amazing feature um i mean
i don't have a particularly large hard
drive and
like this feature to flexibly drop stuff
and then get stuff i need um really
helped me in
many situations yeah speaking of
dropping
i'll um continue with dropping i noticed
that i'm always so slow in the beginning
i need to speed up a little bit
so not only can you get things on demand
but you can also drop the stuff that you
don't need anymore
so if you're done with an analysis for
example then you can
use data let drop to drop the file
content
to free up the disk space again so here
you can see me doing that on one file
and that is dropped
and that is a feature that for example
allows disk space aware computations
that become very relevant especially if
you use large scale data
um some uh workflow that we for example
often use is we install
install input data into an analysis data
set it's really lean
then we get only the data that we need
and compute the results
and then we drop the input data as soon
as it's not necessary anymore while it
is still
linked in a precise version even and
only the file content isn't there
yet and later i'm going to show you how
you can also drop all
results that are potentially
automatically recomputable
in order to save disk space and there's
one way of doing it for example directly
in the scripts where your
script starts with the data that get and
ends with the data drop of the input
data
um okay um
and one thing that i now foreshadowed in
when when i said that we want to not
only show workflows
and what works and how it works but we
also wanted to provide some in-depth
explanations because i think that's
an intriguing mechanism that that
warrants some additional explanation
and that is where i need to take you
into the depths of git versus get annex
and i'm apologizing for that but i hope
that it
contributes to a better understanding of
what data led does
so um one thing that you are need to do
that you need to be aware of
is that data and data sets is installed
stored in one of two places either in
git
or in git annex and if you create a new
data set without any configuration by
default everything is annexed
that means that data that get annex
handles the data and actually stores it
in a hidden place so to say now the
reason
for the separation of git versus git nx
is that git
cannot cope with large file content so
git handles small files while text and
code
and it also does particularly well with
uh text-based files that are non-binary
so anything like an excel file is bad
uh a tsv file is good because the tsv
file is text based
a word doc is bad that's a binary um a
text file is very good
git nx can handle all types of files and
all sizes of files well
but it handles them differently than git
because it stores them
in a dataset annex which isn't
necessarily published to the same place
as your git history this makes it uh
the only way of version controlling
large files and
a cool way of exercising access control
for private
files whereas everything that is stored
in
git is shared whenever you let's say
install a data set right away so these
are the small files and the
file availability metadata the text the
the file names and so forth that are
available right after cloning
so that's what's in git and that and
storing files and git that is useful for
small files non-binary files files that
need to be frequently modified i'm going
to
have an insight on why that is later or
in the next slide
and files that need to be readily
available once somebody
clones your data sets for example data
usage agreements or readme files
and when something is put into an nx
then what happens is that it annex
produces a content identity hash in
order to
precisely identify the content of a file
um and only that content identity
information is put into git while the
file content
is uh managed with git annex and
uh transport logistics exists to then
transfer the data wherever you want it
to have
now so as a visual um summary here the
data set is basically
um separated into two parts git and get
annex that
datalet combines into a smoothly
combined interface so to say
and get annex importantly handles files
differently and there are two
main um where main main aspects where
you where you can see that
for one all of the annexed files those
are the files where you actually need to
data that get the file contents after
you've cloned the repository so
nx contents need to be retrieved on
demand
and are not right readily available
there
and files that are stored in hit annex
and i'm going to show you that at the
middle of the demonstration they are not
modifiable because
git nx right protects them um that
sounds severe but it's actually
something that can be prevented
or circumvented and worked with really
well
but it's something that is a frequent
source of confusion if you actually then
accidentally annex a file
then nx will not immediately make that
file writeable for you and i'm going to
demonstrate that in a short while
but those are the important things to
know about the difference in git buzzers
get annex on how they handle files
now importantly when you share a dataset
which we will
discuss in the last section in the
afternoon
then the place where you store your data
set
may not have support for hosting
also your data because on github for
example you can't push gigabytes of data
and this is where get annex comes into
play because git annex has the transport
logistics
to put your data somewhere else to the
service that you're using anyway
link the um location where the data is
stored to the data set
and then um make the data
retrievable via data let get in the
background without anyone who consumes
your data set
actually carrying on where they are
retrieving those files from
so it looks like those files live on
github when i clone
the data set but they actually come from
a place
that actually can start the large data
now one thing that you as a user are
probably interested in is deciding
whether
files are stored in git and cadence and
there are many ways to do it
one is via those run procedures that i
have shown you with the configuration
option yoda
and there are other ones for example
let's say text to git text to git
makes sure that every text file is
placed in git and not get annex
whereas yoda makes sure that the readme
files are placed
in git and not get annex and everything
that's in code
you can also create those run procedures
there's a tutorial on how to do this and
it's
fairly easy you can write rules where
you just specify a directory
or a file name or let's say every file
that's larger than 20 kilobytes or
something
that you can place in your data set or
you can do it on a per command basis for
example when you add the to get
option to data that's safe okay
um
i have shown you this already and one
thing that i
want to show you too is that git nx
protects your files
so if i go back into my terminal and go
back into
the analysis my analysis data set you've
seen that i have dropped a
pdf beforehand and i can now drop also
the easter egg png that i have placed
into this file but if
i want to drop a file where no record of
another origin
is recorded so where i don't have
additional digital provenance attached
remember this file was obtained via a
wget command
if i drop this file then get annex
will um or data that will warn you that
the drop doesn't doesn't work because
git
annex prevents you from accidentally
losing data where you can't reobtain it
you can configure that behavior but
anything where data doesn't know where
to re-retrieve it from
you can only drop when you use the
node check option or a configuration
in order to really tell those tools that
yes that's a file that i want to get rid
of
now i'm going to quickly show you what
leonard already mentioned
how weird it is if file content isn't
there but
there is a file name so remember i
dropped this png if i now attempt to
open it
then tools um usually error out really
weirdly
because they don't know how to how to
handle this
um if i then get the file again
and uh note how now the recorded
origin from from web so from the xkcd
website is acquired again to re-retrieve
the content
then i can open the file again with a
tool
of my choice um alrighty
okay done that so now i'm going to show
you
how nesting works because you've seen
how i've created
a data set and how i've cloned a data
set and now i want to show you how you
can nest data sets into each other
and i'm going to do this with a very
similar command to what i've already run
which is a datalet clone command but i'm
in this case preparing a data analysis
that i want to showcase here
and in order to do a data analysis i
need input data
and i want to link the input data as a
sub data set
into my analysis data set so that i have
a registered unit
that is in a precise version what i'm
doing therefore is a datalit clone of
this url where there's some data
and i'm attaching the dash d that short
for data set
option to point to the root of the
current data set and that means just
clone this data set
and register it as a sub data set to
the current data set and i also
apply a path here because i want to save
it under a specific path that is called
input
so if i execute this then
datalet will clone the dataset from
github
and store it in a new directory called
input so
now i can say here there is input and in
there
there's not much it's a short demo
but there's a data set and i can now use
the data let's sub data set
sets command to list it now importantly
input is a
data set that has its own revision
history and that one is short
but it's completely independent of the
analysis data set that i've created
so here you can see that this is the
very short history
that this data set has had in its life
and by cloning it as a sub data set
i still have access to all of this
history
um even though it's it's
inside of this analysis data set
and there are two advantages
of nesting things instead of just saving
input data let's say to a data set
for one it overcomes scaling issues so
if we are
um version controlling 15 million files
that's something that git would struggle
with but by nesting data sets
i it's no problem at all to uh
version control an extraordinary amount
of files
and data that adds recursive
capabilities so that i can
use a hierarchy of datasets basically as
a monorepo
that i can that i can apply all of the
commands that i would apply to a single
data set
throughout the history of data sets just
as if it was one repository
but more importantly this concept
modular arises research components and
that makes it more transparent
it makes the let's say input data more
reusable
and i can apply access management on a
per data set
basis if i want to now what
has been registered when i did the
datalet clone command to clone a sub
dataset
i for one know where the sub dataset
came from
but i also know which version of the sub
data set is installed so
the record that has been created in my
super data set
is a path to where this data set lies
in my super data set it's a url to where
it originally came from and importantly
it has
this what is called a subproject commit
which just points to the most recent
commit and is thus able to precisely
identify
which version of a sub data set is used
in a particular sub-data set
so as a quick summary um at this point
data led clone installs a data set
and they can be installed on their own
um
just from a path a url or with an
optional path where it should be
installed
data sets can also be installed as sub
data sets
if i supply the data set option
and importantly when i clone a data set
there are only those files that are
placed in git present after
install and to retrieve actual file
contents of all those files that are
annexed you need data let get
to download the content on demand
datasets preserve the history so if you
clone a dataset then you have
its entire evolution ready to go
and if you do it in a super sub data set
fashion
then the super data set records only the
version state of the history
but nothing of the individual data sets
history
okay um quick question
round of whether there are questions at
this point
if not um there was there was
one question by andre about um
using different types of remotes for
example general mode and
if that's different from um
hosting like for example code and then
the
actual annex content but i mean we get
we'll get to publishing
later right yeah uh if andrei can
um can can can wait a little bit longer
um then it would make things easier if
we can get to that
uh when we have planned to
oh good andre you don't need to be
patient it's very it's a very exciting
topic so
we like to see that people get excited
about it
okay um so now i'm going to um
show you the basics of reproducible data
analysis with datalet
because generally your past self is
definitely the worst collaborator
because you
usually don't reply to emails of your
future self
um and for this i'm going to quickly
skim through something that i'm going to
repeat in the section on reproducible
science
which are a set of organizational
principles
that are very useful and easily applied
with dataled that help to make
data analysis projects intuitively
structured and clear
and one of those principles is
that everything should be kept very
clean and modular
so if you have an analysis then it's
good practice
to keep that one as a super data set but
every component that's relevant and the
standalone unit
should be a sub data set so if you're
using several input data then
you have several sub data sets that
consist of this input data registered
to the super data set this allows you to
not touch or modify the raw data
because by modifying raw data
you for one make it very difficult for
others to take a look at your data set
later
to figure out which is raw data which is
derived data
and it also keeps the raw data reusable
and uh and useful for another
analysis so when doing a
modular setup make sure that the outputs
that you produce on your input data
actually stored outside of input data
sets
right in your analysis data set where
you probably also host your code so here
two views on that
one is this kind of hierarchy through
time where you go from raw data
to bits to fmi prep to analysis to paper
and here's the view of that in a single
data set for example the analysis where
you have a code directory
and maybe also a singularity recipe but
then the input data is a standalone
um component and or maybe even several
and the outputs they are saved into the
actual analysis data set now the next
thing that you need to do in order to
create a data analysis
that is intuitive and easy to reproduce
is to make as much records of everything
as you can so you should record
where you got something from where it's
now what you did to it
and data provides the features that
allow you to do this
so you can link with the data sets and
the sub data sets
where data comes from so what is the
origin you can collect
and store the prominence of the contents
of your data set
and you can document which script
produced which output from which data in
which software environment
and i'm going to show you how that is
done right now
so what i'm going to showcase here as a
quick example
is um a go-to tutorial
for any introductory machine learning
course a classification analysis on the
iris flower data set
that's just the csv file that consists
of sample and petal length of
three species of iris flowers and what
we're doing is we
um use a clustering algorithm to predict
which flower it's going to be based
on the features that are measured
and for this i'm going to
write a quick script into the terminal
in order to save it
that's a little bit of convolution but
it still allows me to
remote control this terminal and gives
me the time to add an important role
rule that i've forgotten to tell you for
intuitively structured data analysis
is really important to keep data set
self-contained so that they are a
portable unit
that does not only can live on your
computer but also on your cluster or in
a supercomputer or on your friend's
laptop
and the main way that you do this is
that
whenever you compute anything you don't
hard code absolute paths into your
scripts but you keep everything relative
and self-contained so that the super
data set references everything that is
underneath it
as relative paths and i can show you how
this is done for example
here where we reference the data
uh in the sub data set not with an
absolute path that would hard code
features of my personal file system that
are not replicable probably on any other
computer
into the into the code but i use a
relative path so that i can send this
data set to leonard
and he will be able to find the um csv
file exactly where i left it and the
path
resolves because it's a self-contained
unit
now one thing that i also wanted to show
you here it's going to be
a super superfluous but i wanted to
just include it to give you an idea of
how uh
python api call of data that looks like
prior to anything being computed the
input data is actually
get it and what this script does
is nothing fancy it reads in
a csv file it plots the relationships
that are
in the csv file and it
saves a prediction on
a test set
into a another csv file and in the
section on writing reproducible paper
we're going to reuse this analysis for
this
so now that i have added um this
blob of text into a file on my dataset i
can run datalet status
and there's a new untracked script
a dot pi file in my data set that i can
save with the data let's save command
and here you can see that i'm also
applying a version tag which is the
equivalent of a git tag and just
one other way of attaching
some sort of identifier to a commit
message or to
a commit entry in the history and um
nothing spectacular happens it's just
save this script when i do
this and if i now do a data let's status
it's clean nothing to save working
quickly and that's important for the
next command that i'm running
which is the data led run command and
before
i use this command i'm going to
show you a visual explanation of what is
what this command does
datalet run basically takes a command
in this case it is this invocation
python 3
codescript.pi which does nothing but
executing the script that i have just
added to the dataset
and it executes this command and
whatever happens
as a result of this computation is saved
under the human readable commit message
that the command
takes data that run has also some
optional
flags one is input anything that you
supply as input
is retrieved via data that get before
you run the command so if you specify
all of the inputs that an analysis has
and you can
do this in a very broad manner by for
example just pointing to a directory
or a complete data set or a glob
then you can make sure that all of the
inputs are actually retrieved prior to
running something
and then there's the output flag and the
output flag
takes care of making annexed files
should they be there modifiable so that
if a computation is redone um
the um result can potentially be updated
and i'm going to show you
in a bit of time uh how this
actually actually works a little bit
better so if i
execute this script now dataled will
take the command run it and then
associate
the results of this computation in this
case i knew them beforehand
and were able to apply to supply them to
output
specifically but i could also just use a
flop
a directory or whatever and it saved
them
into the data set under what is called a
run record and
this is how a run record looks like it's
not the most human readable
thing to have so it's this machine
readable structure that
associates all of the relevant
information but it also has
this commit message and if i would take
a look with tick into the history then i
could also see
precisely which files have been created
with it
and now i want to uh show you and
um exactly how how this can be
really um really useful
um by just cloning the very so i have
i have created this data set beforehand
and have published it to github
and now i'm going to show you how this
run record can be used
by cloning this published data set let's
pretend
i'm just a collaborator of myself and
i'm
sharing this data analysis with me
if i take a look into this analysis
clone here and then uh
do what is called a rerun of
the commit that has produced the run
record so
in this case i already know which commit
hash is it it is because i've
peaked but i can just take a look at the
um at the data set history
identify the sha sum of the commit and
plug it into data let rerun
then dataled can read the machine
readable
record and it makes sure that all of the
inputs
that are specified are retrieved that
all of the outputs that
may be there are unlocked so that they
can be updated
and it recomputes the exact same thing
without me having to
hold myself my my my past server gun
point to find out
how i have done anything and the gitlock
then
makes a record of everything that has
been done to the files
that were created
um now
thing is that's already quite nice um
it's a very simple concept that has a
lot of advantages
but it essentially doesn't go far enough
because
uh it's nice to have this automatic
recomputation and it's no surprise that
it works if i do it again on my own
computer
but if you have a script and try to
rerun it on a different computer then
that may fail
because it may be run with a different
software environment
so if i'm sharing this data set with
leonard and he doesn't have the python
packages installed that i
used then that will just fail and that's
very sad
but data sets luckily can store and
share software environments in the form
of docker singularity containers
and then not only do a run um
like the one that i've shown you but
actually execute
a command or a script inside of a
software container
in order to capture the software
container as additional provenance
and that is achieved with the data led
extension uh the python packages data
led containers
and the command data let containers run
which is just an extension of data.1
that also includes a software
environment and if i want to do this
the first thing that i'm doing is i'm
adding a software container
and we'll go into the details of that in
the first afternoon session you can see
here that i'm
adding a software container from
singularityhub
and i'm registering it under the name
software
very very creative into my data set
and what you can see here now is the
datalet retrieves
the container image that is filled
on singularity hub and stores it inside
of my data set and also because i'm
adding it from a url it registers this
public url
into the data set and if i want to
recreate this analysis then in a
software environment that i can share
with others i'm using a almost similar
command so i'm exchanging data that run
with data let containers run
and i'm adding the additional
specification of the container name that
i'm using because i can have several
containers
in a data set if i want to and then just
re-execute it
and in this case the output is not going
to be spectacularly different
but i now have a dataset record and a
data set
that includes a complete record of
everything that's necessary in order to
reproduce a result
and that's quite nice and that's not
only nice
for for somebody i share this data set
with it's also nice for me
if i ever go to a new computer or if i
ever forget how something is
done or if i'm just being lazy so one
thing that i frequently do for example
just as a quick example is i'm using
data led
to get rid of my short-term memory
because if i now
um just edit the script a little bit
let's say
because i'm not really happy with the
color scheme that i have and
and that could be um
any kind of change that i would do to a
script file
i could also add new functions or
whatever i'm saving this
uh i'm exiting i'm doing any data let's
status
like this it's modified i can save this
modification
just briefly i forgot the commit message
i'm very sorry that was not
best practice but now i can do a data
led rerun
i have remembered that the um
last run that i have attempted uh
to do was not the last but the second to
last
so i can do i think this
um and if i do this then it will take
the
run record take the updated script
to just redo my computation and
i now have a
figure that has an updated color scheme
instead of the color scheme beforehand
cool so as a quick summary for
reproducible
execution data let run records a command
and the impact that it has on a data set
and
whenever a data led run command is run
by default all modifications to the data
lats
to the data set is saved and that's
plainly the reason why you need a clean
dataset status else it would associate
untracked changes that existed
beforehand
to your data set in conjunction with
this script which
it will not do by default so if you get
it if you do it in an unclean dataset
state
it will refuse to run there are however
options where you can
still make it run and just define
precisely which outputs you want to save
and associate
everything that's specified as input is
retrieved prior to command execution
and if you have several inputs then you
just use several flags
and everything that is specified as
output will be unlocked for
modifications
and that's useful for everyone who
re-runs your command so that
files that change during two different
executions
um can actually be modified um
then there's data led containers one
that comes from the data that container
extension that can be used to capture
the software environment as additional
provenance
and that ensures that computations are
run in the desired software setup
and there's support for docker and
singularity containers at the moment
and data that rerun can then
automatically re-execute
a run record in the history later and
you can identify such a run record
however you want with all the tools that
basically git provides you can use a
commit hash
you can do the hat specification that i
have done you can
do use a tag you can also use a range
you can be creative now
datalet rerun is is very helpful to
spare others
and yourself the short and long term
memory task
or equivalently equivalently the
forensic skills to figure out how you
performed in analysis
but importantly it's also a digital and
machine readable provenance record
so it's it's it goes beyond the readme
description of what you have done
providing everyone that you share your
data set with and yourself
the ability to recompute something
automatically and because
all of the outputs are tracked with
their content identity
regardless of whether they are starting
git or get annex you have a direct way
to assess
whether a rerun changed something
in the results that it produced because
if something changed then it will
actually
do or create a commit in your dataset
history
um and in your history you will be able
to
identify which file has changed and if
it's a non-binary file
you can even see precisely how it was
changed you can check out
the first run version
that it produced and compare it to the
version that
was produced with a rerun
and yes does that as an important note
if you do a run
or a re-run and nothing in the dataset
state changes
then the execution doesn't lead to a
commit entry in the dataset history
okay yeah um so maybe just one comment
um from my side um when i started to use
the status run command
um could you briefly turn on turn off
the audio
because then there's this yeah one
second
thanks um yeah just from my experience i
think that
when i started with the data that run
command
admittedly i found it a bit tricky to
kind of get it right and like
properly link like the input and the
output and then specify the command
properly
and um i found it tempting i have to say
in the beginning to just like
execute my script as i would usually do
and then just do a
simple data let's save afterwards
but um i mean like you nicely explained
it's really useful
if you later i want to figure out how a
change in the file came actually about
and how you actually
execute a certain file to then have
these run commands
and also if you are lazy then also this
rerun command just comes in super handy
because the only thing you need to do is
find out the last time you ran a certain
data led command or the data.run command
provide the hash
and then you can just rerun it and you
don't need to think back
and need to figure out how do i actually
execute this script in the first place
um and also one simple way that
i tend to use i don't know if it's best
practice actually but i just look in my
file history
and then figure out like usually if
let's say i want to
change a certain tsv file by running a
python script
then i can look at the history of this
uh
history of changes of this tsv file and
then usually the last change
was the previous run command or the
previous rerun command
and then i can just get the hash do
rerun
and update the script in this way um so
it's very useful
command
thank you for that edition um
okay if there are no other questions
then i will continue
with um demonstrating two additional
things that
i find helpful to know about how data
that works it's
outside of this um this this this
let's demonstrate a start to end
workflow thing
but belongs more to the here is actually
how this tool works section
um so unlocking things something that i
want to draw attention to
so i've demonstrated that data let run
unlocks everything that is specified as
output
but you are also able to do this outside
of a data later on call with the datalit
unlock command and that makes files
writable and i'm going to show you
how this feature of of annex with write
protection
uh uh actually um works so
let's say i'm going to place a data
a data file into um version control by
annex
now i have set up this data set with the
yoda procedure
that means that everything in code
is put into git and everything in the
readme and change file
changelog files is put into git but
anything else will be annexed so if i
just do
an echo of some um um some numbers
into an annexed into a file that i here
called
next files and then do a data that save
um whoops i have an american keyboard
here that's a bit annoying always
um next a file
then um this will be this file will not
be stored in
git but in annex and now i'm going to
demonstrate what happens if i then try
to write to this file
um so if i just want to append
another string of numbers to this file
then
you will see something like a permission
denied error that looks
really troublesome if you're not used to
seeing that
if i uh open it up with a text editor
then i get this worrisome warning of
file next file is unwriteable
and that's something that that would
stress me out if i wouldn't know
what that is now the thing is that
um here on this slide i'm demonstrating
this when
i have an annexed file then what this
annexed file
actually is and this does not apply to
windows
um but on any other system this file is
what is called a sim link
so that's what this structure here with
this little
error in this pointer how
this is how zim link is shown and that
means that the file contents
that um appear to be in my file actually
lie
in this very very cryptic path that
points to
a hidden directory in git namely nx
objects which is the so called nx object
tree and this is just the internal
representation of where get annex
stores your files and there's not much
magic behind this the
cryptic characters here is just a
representation of the content identity
hash
of of your file content so that they can
be uniquely identified
now um everything that's in this object
tree is right protected so that you
can't accidentally
lose changes or lose a file or whatever
but that means that you get those
permission denied errors when you try to
to um to to edit them and that's why
it's useful to keep code and stuff that
you frequently modify
in in git so that you can just very
comfortably
always have add editions and then save
them
but if you have something annexed and
you want to do a modification
then what you need to do up outside of
the dataliterun command
is a data led unlock command if i do
this
then the annexed file is unlocked i can
echo
whatever i want to echo inside of the
file
if i do a data led status then
i can see that it's now modified and
then i can do
a data let's save afterwards
[Music]
um
whoops okay and once it is saved
um it is put back into the object tree
where it's again
right protected so that's one thing of
the peculiarities of working in data
data sets but it can be circumvented by
just placing
that stuff that you want to have in git
into git and there are plenty of
tutorials and rules and read
and examples in the data that handbook
to show you how that can be done
and um it's also important that some
tools for example
matlab don't like symlinks so the the
tools that i frequently work with
um like fsl all those large neural
imaging
tools they can read symlinks just fine
but there are tools
that don't like some links and then
display cryptic error messages because
they
can't seem to follow these files and
if you then unlock them prior to opening
them
for example with matlab or doing the
operation that you want to do in the
data let run command prevents those
um those arrows such should you ever
come across them
the next thing that i wanted to show you
is how to remove a data set because that
also
can be relevant uh and it's important so
frequently i um the first dozen of data
sets that i wanted to remove
that went horribly wrong because as
mentioned before
the nx data is right protected so uh
whenever i
remove a folder i do it with the rm
command to remove and then
supply rf to do it on a directory
with um uh with without uh checking
uh but if i try to do this on a data set
then you get all of these messages that
tell you oh god i can't remove this
cryptic path that points to the object
tree because that's the actual file
that's right protected
and that's um not really cool and ugly
and if that happens
if you accidentally ever do this then uh
what you
need to do in order to get out of it is
to um and that's a little bit ugly
but that's the that's that's the work
around here
is you need to apply recursive write
permissions
so the unix smart command change mode
um r recursive plus w
apply write permissions to a data set
makes everything writable and thus also
removable
but the actual way to remove a data set
is to use data let remove
so if i go out of this
data set again
um oops and
then do oh right there's something that
i missed um so uh
obviously so this is how you remove a
data set um but
get any protects files as you have seen
with drop
and if you attempt to remove a file then
this will initially fail if there's any
file inside of there
that cannot be potentially re-retrieved
so let's say a result that only exists
on your computer and where there's no
um when no one knows that there's
another copy of it
and then um you will get such an error
message
it's unsafe you can't remove the data
set if you wanted to
and in that case if you are really sure
that you want to remove a data set
then you can use the no check option to
um
to to disable those checks
to foster removal and then you can also
have data sets that have sub data sets
and if you want to remove a data set
with its install sub data sets
um without um doing anything particular
then it will also provide you a warning
that this data set has present sub data
sets
and in order to remove a data set
recursively you can use the
r or recursive flag to apply the remove
operation
throughout the history so in the case of
when i want to let's say remove the
analysis clone
i just um supply it as the
argument to the data set option and say
recursive and no check because i'm
really sure that i want to
get rid of this data set on my hard
drive and it's gone
alrighty and a complete overview of all
of the common file subsystem operations
should you ever want to to know whether
it's okay to rename a folder or a
dataset or something
you can find in the datalet handbook and
i'm here now only noting the um
things that i find most confusing as a
beginner with datalet
to to give you a heads up but usually
all common file system operations
uh work just as in the normal directory
on your computer
and i have um you know yes sorry um
when you talked about a confusing
beginner i felt obliged to say something
so um actually this um this dash d flag
i found it to be
quite important to specify to especially
if you have lots of different
data sets and sub data sets to specify
to which data set you want to apply um
a certain change like for example in
removal or a safe command
um so if you're in a super data set and
you actually want to apply
changes to a sub data set you can use
this dash d command
and specify your sub data set to then
apply whatever you do
to the sub data set and not to the super
data set
um so that's what i found to be helpful
to
um yeah just be mindful um and use this
dash the argument to specify to which
data set changes
yeah thank you something has frozen i
need to um
to reload this uh one second
um maybe i can add something else
so everything is frozen but if you can
still hear me
that's actually okay so i have prepared
a
full-blown more complex analysis
set up from start to end but i took too
much time talking i'm very sorry about
this
and i would suggest instead of doing
a 30-minute tour through a
start to end input data creation
in updating data we go into lunch break
have a rest digest what we've heard and
adjust some
nice food and then come back to the
afternoon session
where we have a chance to take a look at
the example maybe and also the rest of
the workshop contents